docs(tutorial): add Part 5 (#32344)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/tutorial/part-5/index.mdx

---
title: "Part 5: Transform data to use MDX"
---

import { Announcement, Notification } from 'gatsby-interface'
import Collapsible from '@components/collapsible'
import { MdInfo } from 'react-icons/md'

<Notification
  Icon={MdInfo}
  tone="WARNING"
  variant="SECONDARY"
  content={
    <div>
      <p>
        <strong>Note:</strong> We{"'"}re still working on updating this Tutorial to use Gatsby v3.
        The first few parts of the new Tutorial have been released here, and subsequent parts
        will be added as we finish them.
      </p>
      <p style={{ marginBottom: 0 }}>
        If you{"'"}re looking for a full experience in the meantime, you can check out the (slightly outdated){" "}
        <a href="https://v2.gatsbyjs.com/docs/tutorial/">
          <strong>Gatsby v2 Tutorial</strong>
        </a>
        .
      </p>
    </div>
  }
/>

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: Just thinking out loud here as I'm not sure myself how to best handle this:

It would probably make sense to mention that _generally speaking_ transformer plugins have the nomenclature of `gatsby-transformer-*`. But then couple of lines down below we say that `gatsby-plugin-mdx` is also one 😄 Which is right but for reasons that I can't recall it was named this way.

But it shouldn't confuse people overall.

Author: Good idea! Added a note to the beginning.

In this part of the Tutorial, you'll learn about one particular transformer plugin, `gatsby-plugin-mdx`, which lets you use [MDX](https://mdxjs.com/), a file format that allows Markdown and JSX alongside your text content. (Fun fact: this Tutorial is actually written in MDX!) You'll use MDX to add some content to your blog post files, and then you'll use `gatsby-plugin-mdx` to render the contents of your posts on your Blog page.

By the end of this part of the Tutorial, you will be able to:

- Write an MDX file with Markdown formatting and frontmatter.
- Use the `gatsby-plugin-mdx` plugin to render the contents of your MDX files on your Blog page.
- Use the `sort` field to control the order of results in your GraphQL queries.

https://github.com/meganesu/gatsby-intro-workshop-example-site-with-v3/commit/207d5d11d72e972ac1ec5507159ff2c4460c98b9

## A closer look at Gatsby's GraphQL data layer

To understand how `gatsby-plugin-mdx` and other transformer plugins work, you need to know a bit more about how Gatsby’s GraphQL data layer works.

> Inside the data layer, information is stored in objects called **nodes**. Different source plugins create different types of nodes, each of which have their own properties. For example, `gatsby-source-filesystem` creates File nodes.

Reviewer: One could add that nodes are the smallest unit in our data layer

Author: Good callout! Added a sentence for it (coming in my next commit)

A **transformer plugin** converts nodes from one type to another. For example, the `gatsby-plugin-mdx` plugin transforms File nodes that have the `.mdx` extension into MDX nodes, which have a different set of fields that you can query using GraphQL. Transformer plugins let you manipulate the raw data in the nodes created by source plugins, so that you can get it into the structure or format you need.

![The gatsby-source-filesystem plugin pulls data from your local filesystem into Gatsby's GraphQL data layer as File nodes. Then the gatsby-plugin-mdx transformer plugin uses those File nodes to create new MDX nodes. Finally, you can use GraphQL queries to pull data from the MDX nodes into your components.](./data-layer-with-nodes.png)

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

> **Note:** Even though it's called a transformer plugin, it's not actually *changing* the original nodes created by the source plugins. Each transformer plugin creates new nodes based on the data from the sourced nodes, but it doesn't actually change the source nodes themselves. So even though `gatsby-plugin-mdx` creates new MDX nodes, you can still access the original File nodes created by `gatsby-source-filesystem`.

Reviewer: I like that note, great to mention that!

Here are some popular remark plugins:

* [`gatsby-remark-images`](/plugins/gatsby-remark-images/): Use this if you want to use the Markdown image syntax (which looks like this: `![alt](image url)`).
    * To use this plugin, you'll also need `gatsby-plugin-sharp`, which you installed already in Part 3.
* [`gatsby-remark-prismjs`](/plugins/gatsby-remark-prismjs/): Add syntax highlighting to your code blocks.
* [`gatsby-remark-autolink-headers`](/plugins/gatsby-remark-autolink-headers/): Automatically create links for all the headers in your Markdown content.

Try searching for `gatsby-remark-` in the [Gatsby Plugin Library](/plugins/) for a full list.

</Announcement>

### Task: query

In GraphiQL, there are now two new fields available for you to use in your queries: `allMdx` and `mdx`. In this part of the Tutorial, you'll use `allMdx` to add the contents of each blog post to your Blog page. (You'll use `mdx` later on, in Part 6.)

<Collapsible
  summary="allMdx field in GraphiQL"
>

<Announcement style={{marginBottom: "1.5rem"}}>

You can see fields from the original node in the `parent` field. TRY IT IN GRAPHIQL. THE ORIGINAL NODES WILL STILL BE THERE.

> - SHOULD WE TEACH THEM ABOUT THE PARENT FIELD? possibly use the parent field to get access to the "changeTime" field, so they can add a "Updated: XXXXX" date to their post? (Possibly have to teach them about GraphQL fragments then...) (only as a callout.)

Reviewer: Maybe as a bonus or extra lesson for people who want to learn this? I'd definitely would flag this under "definitely helpful in the long run as at some point you'll need to interact with this / need this functionality" and already teaching it here would be super cool.

Author: Nice! I added it as a "Pro Tip" callout box, so hopefully folks who get confused by it will just skip over it.

</Announcement>

</Collapsible>

> Write a query to get your MDX content. Let's start by getting just the front matter. While you're at it, you can also grab the `id` field, which you can use as a React `key` for the items in your list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write a query to get your MDX content. Let's start by getting just the frontmatter. While you're at it, you can also grab the `id` field, which you can use as a React `key` for the items in your list.
```

```

> Woah, that's a lot of information! The `body` field actually contains a function that WHAT DOES IT DO? To render the contents of your MDX file, you'll use a component from `gatsby-plugin-mdx` called `MDXRenderer`, which knows how to parse the `body` field.

Reviewer: I only know so much that this is the _compiled_ output of MDX

Author: Sweet! That's probably good enough 😂
